---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# labradoR

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/bonifazi/labradoR/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bonifazi/labradoR/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)

<!-- badges: end -->

<img src="man/figures/logo_labradoR.png" align="right" width="200"/>

The goal of the `labradoR` R package is to facilitate the handling and
post-processing of
[`Retriever`](https://genebankdata.cgn.wur.nl/software/software.html)
software output. Retriever is a software for pedigree analysis that
generates statistics and plots on population structure, inbreeding, and
kinship from pedigrees. For more information on `Retriever`, please
refer to the [official software
website](https://genebankdata.cgn.wur.nl/software/software.html) and its
associated [publication](https://www.mdpi.com/2076-2615/11/5/1332).

`labradoR` help users to import the output generated by Retriever into R
for further manipulation and downstream analyses. `labradoR` loads the
main tabular information into a list containing `data.frame` objects and
associated `ggplot2` plots generated from them.

## Installation

You can install the development version of `labradoR` from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("bonifazi/labradoR")
```

## Usage

The below is a basic example showing the package usage. As input, you
need to provide the path to the `.out` file generated by `Retriever`.
Note that the `.out` file can be in English or in Dutch (depending on
the settings used when running Retriever). Both languages are supported:
set the needed language using the `language` argument (`ENG` for English
and `DUT` for Dutch).

```         
library(labradoR)
## example usage
output <- process_retriever(file_name = "C:/myPath/pedigree_Retriever.out",
 language = "ENG")

# show the output list
str(output, max.levels = 1, give.attr = F)
```

Note: since the logic of `labradoR` is that of “fetching” lines from
`Retriever`’s output, if anything changes in the format of the `.out`
file, then `labradoR`’s associated code will need to be adapted
accordingly.

# Output example

View an example of the output generated by `labradoR` [here](dev/Create_report_sheep_example.html). Here,
`Retriver` was run on a sheep pedigree simulated in`MoBPS` (see code
[here](dev/Simulate_sheep_test_dataset.R)). Note that this is a simple
case to showcase the output of `labradoR`: real pedigrees will generate
more uneven distributions.

## Citation

If you use the `labradoR` package in your research, please cite it as
follows:

1.  **Citing the Software**\
    To cite the software directly, you can use the following format in
    your work:

    > Bonifazi, R. (2025). *labradoR: An R package for handling and
    > post-processing Retriever output.* Version 0.1.0. Retrieved from
    > <https://github.com/bonifazi/labradoR>.

2.  **Citing the associated paper**

    Currently in preparation.

## Contributing

You are welcome to contribute to the development of `labradoR`.

#### How to Contribute

-   Feature Requests: If you have a new feature in mind or a suggestion
    for improvement, please open a GitHub issue to discuss it.

-   Bug Reports: If you encounter any bugs or issues while using
    `labradoR`, please submit a bug report with detailed information
    about the problem.

-   Pull Requests: feel free to fork the repository, make your changes,
    and submit a pull request.

## News and Updates

Check out the [NEWS](NEWS.md) file for the latest updates and changes to
the package.
